This video is brought to you by Babel start learning a new language today
with Babel, sign up for a three month subscription,
and you'll get three months for free, more on them in a bit.
And let's get into the video, the works of James Joyce, particularly UES,
and Finnigan's way can almost universally considered classics,
but they're a little different and than most of the great works of literature
that have been read for decades, if not centuries, in all corners of the world,
they aren't notorious amongst their peers.
They're among the most dense and difficult books to try and read they're follow
obscure language made up words in pages that just dissolve into a bizarre stream
of consciousness, narrative,
but something else here that's important to Ireland.
It's not an idealized island.
It's not some wonderful bucolic landscape worthy of a postcard.
Joyce captures the hardships, the poverty,
the violence suffered by so many of Dublin's turn of the century citizens.
The better or worse Joyce's islands is dark and dreadful. And it's so vivid.
He wrote directly from his own experiences from his family's fall,
from middle class to the times they escaped creditors by fleeing in the night
from his father's drunken rages to his own realization that he had in fact
inherited more from his father than he wanted to admit.
Joyces works may be the most difficult literature,
but they also written from a place very close to reality.
What kind of man was it that wrote some of the most dense,
difficult books in the English language?
What one who knew the same struggles as his characters,
It's an or repeated bit of wisdom that's passed down through creative writing
classes. Write what you know, with that in mind,
it's only fitting that we really make an effort to capture the spirit of James
Joyce and his work by starting somewhere in the middle of his story.
Joyce began writing Dublin in 1904,
a collection of short stories that would be published a decade later.
It wasn't an easy literary birth either.
The collection was meant to describe everyday life in Dublin with no
embellishment. It was dark and dysfunctional. And at the same time,
it took a very moral starts about some of the issues raised in its pages.
The characters deal with things like feelings of failure and spare,
then grand opportunities,
but are too terrified to seize the day and ultimately live with regret.
They spend money. They don't have on drink that they don't need the,
to is full of betrayal. Misery worry, and unhappiness.
Joyce himself described the stories.
Disco containing a special odor of corruption. When it came time to publish,
there was that actually a problem.
The places Joyce describes were real and most publishers were understandably
hesitant to print something so dark that contained real names of places from
pubs to churches.
There's another theme that runs throughout the book and that's one of violent
parents.
Fathers wonder where their sons picked up their habit of drinking and fighting,
not realizing they learn them at home while others live in such fear of their
fathers,
that they start to suffer from the physical symptoms of constant terror.
This is where we come to joy himself as his familiarity with the recurring
themes of his works explains just how much of his childhood shaped his adult
life. He would credit his father,
John Stan Las with his intimate knowledge of Dublin.
He also served as inspiration for numerous characters once writing that the
humor of Uly is his it's people are his friends.
The book is his spitting image.
That's not to say their relationship was always rose colors.
Like the pages he would eventually write Joyce's relationship with his father
was often dark and damaged. John sta house. Wasn't the most reliable man.
He abandoned his attempt at a medical degree in favor of his love of music.
He was a well known singer across county cork,
but that wasn't enough for the father of may Murray, the objective,
his affection. They married in 1880 anyway, and right from the beginning,
their lives were tinged with tragedy.
Their first child died when he was only eight days old.
And the second born on February,
the second 1882 was named James Augustine alos Joyce.
By the time their first surviving son was born.
John Stan SL had secured a job as a rate collector and as they had settled into
their first home and another example of the circular nature of Joyce's life,
their address was the very same one that he would use for the ti character in
ulyses Joyce's life should have been a good one.
His father had a job that he took too well.
They lived in a nice home and they had a regular salary to support themselves,
but their lifestyle, particularly John Stans, Love's love of the hubs,
made it difficult to make ends meet even as they moved into a three story home
in Rath mines and entertained some of Dublin's most promising musicians,
they were forced to take out loans and offer up property.
They had inherited as collateral. Then in 1887,
John Stan SAS claimed that he had been attacked in Phoenix park and all the cash
she had collected that day was stolen.
By this time his employers were already getting suspicious.
He was no longer allowed the freedom he had enjoyed.
And it wasn't long after that,
the six year old Joyce was sent away to boarding school in Congo's wood college,
while he wasn't there to see the undeniable shift in his father's moods,
he did hear about it through his younger siblings.
And there was quite a few of those. Joyce was the all oldest of 10 children.
Although his mother had more pregnancies than that. And it was his brother,
Stan LA,
who once told him that their father had become a man of unreliable temper and
vile humor.
It wasn't until much later that Joyce learns things had gotten so bad that their
mother had contemplate a divorce, which was unthinkable in Ireland at the time.
The only reason she didn't, he was that a confessor was horrified at the idea.
In the following years,
the fortunes of the Joyce family continued on a downward spiral.
John lost his job and was denied a full pension because of his poor employment
history. As his debts mounted, he was forced to sell some of his property.
The rest were seized by debt collectors. Despite being at boarding school,
Joyce was still around to see enough of his familial misfortune,
that it would leave a lasting mark on him.
His sympathy for the plight of young children,
living in fear and poverty would become a regular influence on his work.
Joyce eventually left boarding school altogether returning home to his family,
which moved nine times and 11 years with his mother's help.
He took charge of his own schooling. Eventually he and his brother,
Stan LA would attend BLV college. Well,
they were admitted tuition free from there.
It was onto university college in Dublin web,
despite his familiar impoverishment,
the young Joyce quickly earned himself the nickname sunny gym,
because it was so quick to laugh by the time he had finished school.
The situation at home was di
When Joyce graduated from university in 1902,
the rest of the family was living in a home that a family friend described
poorly. The banisters were broken. The grass in the backyard was all blackened.
They said there was a laundry there and a few chickens, and it was a very,
very miserable home. Joyce's brother.
Stan Las wrote extensively on the continued downward spiral of the family.
When their father was sober, he was easy and pleasant, reminiscing,
and humorous. When he was drunk, he was lying and hypocritical,
a crazy drunkard, the large family splintered and struggled joy,
set it off to Paris with a desire to pursue the same medical degree that his
father had abandoned, albeit with no money.
He skated by earning what he could by teaching English and writing the odd
article. But it wasn't long before he was summoned back to Dublin,
his mother was dying and she wanted to see him one last time.
And here too is a very real snapshot in time.
That makes its way into Joyce's work later in a portrait of the artist as
a young man, a character denies his mother,
her dying wish and is consumed with guilt.
Joyce had a parallel experience when he returned to Irelands and found his
mother dying of liver cancer.
She asked him to take confession and holy communion,
Joyce's Catholic faith that lapsed blood long ago, and he refused.
He also refused his uncle's request to pray at his mother's bedside.
When she died, the guilt showed up later in his work,
even as Joyce and his siblings were watching their mother die,
their father was spiraling outta control.
San Sal's diary recorded one particularly heartbreaking incidents where John
Stan Claus's drunk out of his mind, wandered into their,
a sick room and burst out. I'm finished. I can't do anymore.
If you can't get well die, die, and be damned to you.
Joyce stepped in to head off a fight between his brother and their father.
And according to the diaries, his siblings kept in the following years.
The relationship soured, John would often shout and scream when he was drunk.
And now he screamed about how much he hated his children and his eldest in
particular, one by one,
his children left and for the final decade of their father's life,
he lived alone in a boarding house.
He died in 1931 and when his land lady cleaned out his room,
all he had was some clothes and a copy of his son's play exiles.
And as for Joyce, he didn't hate his father. In fact, after John Stan SALs died,
Joyce appealed to the city of Dublin and asked that he be allowed to purchase a
bench in an area near the hospital where he had passed.
He was refused at the time, but his request was not forgotten. In 2018,
a bench were,
was finally installed with an inscription that read James Joyce wished that a
bench be placed here in memory of his father, John Joyce,
who lived nearby and died in this place.
So how about a random fact about James Joyce? He was a big time PLO speaking,
five languages fluently and being competent in many,
many more as if you want to take a leaf out of all one of his books. Well,
that's where today's sponsor. Babble comes in.
Maybe you need to brush up your language skills for work,
or maybe you just want the opportunity to go and work abroad or something. Well,
either way you can brush up or just begin learning a language with babble,
and you might already had a crack at learning language with some basic free app
from the app store, but B does away with a six indeed.
It's the number one language learning app in the world with 14 different
languages currently available. So why is B better than the rest? Well,
importantly, they're the strong focus on confidence building,
which is a huge part of learning a language.
You can learn all of the vocab and grammar nuance,
but if you don't have a chance to speak,
not really gonna make any progress that all simulates conversations with native
speakers and users, voice recognition technology to make that happen.
Their courses are all designed by experts rather than just constructed by an
algorithm, which doesn't consider things like your native language.
It'll also consider how you like to learn with topics that you are interested
in. They've got an app as well. So it's really easy to just jump and practice.
Whenever you have a down moment and those short few minutes of practice,
while they really do all add up,
it's also very nicely designed and it's easy to use.
So start learning a new language today with B sign up for a three month
subscription and get three months for free.
There's a link below and let's get back to Joyce.
Every artist needs a good muse.
And Joyce met his not long after the passing of his mother. He was 22 years old,
just back from Paris.
And he had decided to stay in Dublin for a bit to teach and write book reviews.
It was around that time that Joyce spotted a young redheaded girl walking down
the street in dub. He approached her,
asked her for a date and she never showed up.
It wasn't about to be dissuaded though. So when he asked her again, well,
she did more than just show up.
The mystery woman left quite an impression on Joyce.
He would later describe that second date as the day she made me a man.
The first date was a date. He would never forget. It was June the 16th, 1904.
And it ultimately be came the date he would later use as the setting for ulyses
as for the girl,
her name was Nora barnacle and she was a Galway girl working in Dublin as a
chamber mate.
It was only a few months later in October that James and Nora left islands for
the continents eventually settling in Trias in Italy.
It's often said that they eloped,
but Joyce made it very clear that his parents offered difficult relationship.
Had soured him on the idea of marriage.
He wrote my home was simply a middle class affair ruined by spend thrift habits,
which I have inherited. My mother was slowly killed.
I think by father's ill treatment, I cursed the system which made her a victim.
Dad said there was absolutely no doubt that he was completely devoted to Nora.
And so that they were passionately in love with each other,
for all of their days, say for a few short trips, they were almost never apart.
And even though they didn't officially marry and until 1931,
there was no question that Joyce had found his me used.
And Nora had found the love of her life when they left Ireland and Joyce never
truly recorded his reasons for leaving in any sort of concrete way.
They boarded a ship separately to avoid chatter from his family. As for Nora,
it was an almost unfathomable risk. She wasn't married after all.
And at the time literally hopping onto a ship and leaving her home to travel
the, with a man would've been a major scandal.
Nora was putting a lot of faith in him too. If he had abandoned her,
she would've had no way to support herself and returning home.
Would've been tricky outside of Irelands, their life. Wasn't just an easy,
free flowing romance.
They first headed to Zurich where the job Joyce was chasing fell through.
From there,
it was off to triage where some of choices inherited traits from his father,
rid themselves for a time Joyce skated through on odd jobs,
carrying a ton of debt and massive loans and drinking so much.
And so often that he relied on the kindness of strangers to carry him home.
Still.
She gave birth to their first child Giorgio in 1905 and their second Lu
in 1907, while always struggled to write and get published.
She raised the children and acted as his assistant,
the iron tooth problems that would plague him for decades had already begun.
So too,
had his tendency to pick moments and characters out of his life to write about
in 1909, he headed back to Ireland for a visit. He was alone.
And when a mutual acquaintance suggested that he too had enjoyed Nora's company
in a rather him, what way Joyce was incensed.
It was at that moment that he made it a point to visit the grave site of one of
her previous boyfriends.
He would ultimately base characters in Dublins on Nora and, uh, dead lover.
James and Nora were still living in Italy at the outbreak of world war I
<affirmative>. And that's when they moved again, back to Urich.
Some years later after the great European conflict was over the lovers,
moved on to Paris. In the meantime, he had written works like exiles,
the play that would be found in his father's boarding house room after his death
and the autobiographical portrait of the artist as a young man,
but he hadn't been met with the kind of success that most, I just hope for.
I said his work was greeted with something a little closer to confusion,
but in 1922, on Joyce's 40th birthday,
he would finally publish what would become his most famous work UES.
And it's almost impossible to give Joyce his full due because he had no
intentions of leaving any detail up to his imagination.
Take the house at seven ale street, it's a real house. And in one scene,
his T while protagonist, Leo, Paul bloom returns home and finds,
he doesn't have his key.
He decides that instead of bothering his wife to come to the door,
he's going to hop the railing and get in through another door.
This is straightforward enough.
And most authors would be fine with a possibility that there might be a little
creative license taken with the scene.
The railing might be a little too high in the real world or the drop a little
too far, but on November the second, 1921,
Joyce wrote to his arm since Aster to double check for him to make sure that it
could be done. He had seen it done,
but by someone young and athletic would his 38 year old,
every man be able to do it.
So did his aunt actually head out into the Dublin streets to check on whether or
not it was possible? It's hard to say,
but it's also the perfect example of just how committed Joyce was to capturing
the streets of Dublin in a very grounded,
ultra realistic sort of way that dedication didn't come without a
price. Once U was published,
he was hesitant to return to his home country because he was afraid of being
sued for Lial. As soon as it rolled off the presses,
the book was an instant source of controversy.
Critics didn't just argue about the worth of the text,
but they argued what the actual manuscript was supposed to say.
There were so many to the text and corrections made by the printers that even
decades after Joyce's death, no one is really sure.
Just what version he actually wanted.
Printed is also worth clearing up a common misconception.
The book was banned in the UK where census decided that it made no sense
whatsoever and was undeniably filthy. It stayed on the,
a list until 1936, but it was never prohibited in Ireland.
The movie based on the book was released in 1967 and immediately banned a
restriction that would only be lifted 33 years later after finishing ulyses
Joyce put down his pen for an entire year when he finally picked it up again,
what came out on the page was just downright bizarre.
He wrote Finnigans were week between 1923 and 1939.
And it's been called things like cryptic,
which is putting it very mildly regardless of its difficulty or value.
It's impossible to deny that finishing the work consumed Joice for much of the
rest of his life. By the time Finnigan's wake was ready for print.
As chronic eye troubles had degraded to the point where he was near blind and he
relied on Nora for constant help his history of medical problems,
particularly with his eyes isn't for the squeamish.
He had undergone a series of operations that had removed and reshaped parts of
his eyes. And he had had all of his teeth removed as well.
He underwent his seventh thigh operation in 1925 and it left him in constant
pain. Still. He was far from being able to rest.
That was another threat on the horizon.
No long after Finnegan's wake was published. World war II broke out.
The Joyce family was already working through problems of their own. Their son,
George was facing difficulties with alcohol and their daughter was struggling
too. After our relationship with Samuel Beckett fell apart,
she drifted into a steep mental decline.
Lu was in a mental clinic when the arts occupation of France was imminence and
the Joyces knew that they needed leave. They appealed to the Irish diplomat,
Sean Lester for helping in escaping from France. So well, Joyce,
Nora and their son were able to return to Zurich.
Lu was left behind and spent the war years in VII by all accounts,
Joyce didn't deal well with his daughter's suffering.
He San into a deep depression that delayed his work.
And when they were forced to leave her behind at the outbreak of war,
he was devastated.
Lu Joyce's story is a tragic one treated by Carl Young and diagnosed as a
schizophrenic.
She was a promising young dancer when Beckett rejected her saying he had only
been trying to get close to her father. Not her,
her behavior became more and more erratic. And it wasn't long after that,
that she held a chair at her mother that made her brother get her committed.
After the end of world war II, she was transferred to north Hampton.
She remained for of her life. She died there in 1982, as for Joyce,
his death came not long after he moved most of his family to the relative safety
of Zurich. By all accounts,
he was still heartbroken at the less than favorable reception critics and
audiences gave his complex Finnigans wake.
And he was bearing that disappointment. When he died on January the 13th,
19 41, 1,
he was having a surgery for a perforated ulcer when he passed away at the age of
58,
the controversy around Joyce didn't stop with his death because his death was so
sudden and unexpected. There were no plans for his death. And at the time,
Marlin was less than worried about properly honoring the man who would
eventually become one of his most famous authors.
When Nora asked the government of repatriates remains for burial on his native
soil, a request was refused. Irish diplomats in Zurich,
didn't attend the funeral. And some of the telegrams sent to those diplomats.
Weren't exactly sympathetic. One of them read,
please wire details about Joyce's death. If possible,
find out if he died a Catholic NORRA two died in Zurich in 1951,
thanks to acute renal failure. She was 67 years old.
And at the time of her death,
it's worth noting that she hadn't seen her daughter since 1936 refusing to visit
her in the institution that they had confined her to last year, 2019,
the Dublin city council put forward a bid to do exactly what Nora had requested.
So many years, PR repatriate choices remains. The backlash was swift.
Joyce May have written some of the most detailed accounts of Irish life that the
modern literary world had ever seen,
but he had repeatedly refused Irish citizenship and actually died as a British
citizen. And that's the ultimate irony of choice.
One that's been debated for a long time.
And one that will continue to puzzle those who consider him.
One of Ireland's fine writers.
Joyce was able to create works that captured some of Ireland's deepest,
darkest truths,
but he also spent much of his life unwilling to return to the homelands that
gave him life and made him famous. Joyce's story.
Isn't one of high literature or the quintessential birth of a writer.
It's about the complicated relationship we have with the things and the people
that shape our lives. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting.
If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below and don't forget a subscribe.
We've got brand new videos, just like this several days a week.
Please also check out our fantastic sponsor baling in a link to them below and
as always, thank you for watching.